.. include:: ../../references.txt

.. _pig-010:

***************************************
PIG 10 - Evolution od spectral analysis
***************************************

* Author: Régis Terrier (editor) & Axel Donath
* Created: March 19, 2019
* Accepted:
* Status: draft
* Discussion:

Introduction
============


Current data formats
====================

The current data format is strongly driven by the OGIP format. While convenient for portability
and inclusion of OGIP type datasets in gammapy, this introduces a strong discrepancy with `Map`
based analysis and the multiplication of data formats and analysis functions and classes. While
we can/should still support the IO with OGIP type spectra, we can try to rely more on data formats
used in the other parts of data reduction and provide `from_OGIP` and `to_OGIP` methods. This will
reduce significantly code by relying more on core data reduction functions. It will also provide
an easier adaption to the `Dataset` formalism used in the modeling/fitting part of gammapy.

Counts spectra
--------------

Counts spectra are represented by `~gammapy.spectrum.CountsSpectrum` and `~gammapy.spectrum.PHACountsSpectrum`.
The former is a `~gammapy.utils.NDDataArray` with a `~gammapy.utils.BinnedDataAxis` for the energy.
The latter inherits from the `~gammapy.spectrum.CountsSpectrum` and adds a number of properties:
`backscal`, `quality`, `areascal`, `livetime`. This is mostly designed for OGIP spectra
(namely type I OGIP spectrum: 1 file - 1 observation)

In addition there is a `~gammapy.spectrum.PHACountsSpectrumList` inheriting from `list` which represents
an ensemble of PHA spectra in the form of a type II OGIP file.
See https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/heasarc/ofwg/docs/spectra/ogip_92_007/node8.html
This has the advantage of having only one OGIP file for a large number of observations.

Reduced IRFs
------------

The `~gammapy.irf.EffectiveAreaTable` is used to represent the energy dependent effective area
at a given position in the FoV. Currently it is directly extracted from the `~gammapy.irf.EffectiveAreaTable2D`
at a specific offset value. The possible extension or morphology of the source to be tested is not taken
into account.  In the case of point source analysis, a function `apply_containment_fraction`is defined
in spectrum/irf_reduce.py to correct for leakage.

Taking into account the `livetime` provides the exposure.

The energy dispersion matrix is stored in `~gammapy.irf.EnergyDispersion`. This class stores
the partial integrals used to convolve a true energy spectrum to a reco energy one. It is therefore
rather a kernel function than an IRF. This kernel is also used for the `Map` analsys and its ussage
is widespread in gammapy. This comes at the cost of the absence of a real 1D energy dispersion,
which would store, for a set of true energies E_t, the pdf(E_r/E_t | E_t)  as a function of the migration
defined as the ratio m=E_r/E_t.

No specific format currently exists to store 1D background count rate from the ON region. No simple function
exists to project from a `~gammapy.irf.background3D` to a 1D background.

Spectrum observations
---------------------


Proposed evolutions
===================

We propose to move to a formalism following the `Map` structure with a `RegionMap` with is basically
a `Map` with a single spatial bin. This would allow to reuse functions to create exposure and background maps.

A dedicated energy MapAxis
--------------------------

A first convenient step would be to introduce a dedicated `MapAxis` for energy manipulation. This would
allow to get rid of a number of utility functions and classes such as `~gammapy.utils.EnergyBounds` and
would have a general usage along all type of gammapy analysis.

A possible implementation:
```
class EnergyAxis(MapAxis):
    """A specialized MApAxis for energy

    This can be used both for true or reco energy.

    Parameters
    ----------
    nodes : `~astropy.units.Quantity`
        a vector of energies
    interp : str, `lin`or `log`
        the interpolation mode, default 'log'
    node_edges : str
        type of axis: 'edges' or 'center'
    is_e_true : bool
        true energy axis if True, reco energy otherwise , Default False
    """
    def __init__(self, nodes, interp="log", node_type="edges", is_e_true = False):
        # Check that unit is homogeneous to energy
        unit = nodes.unit
        nodes = nodes.value

        super().__init__(nodes=nodes, interp=interp, name="energy",
                       node_type=node_type, unit=unit)

        if is_e_true == True:
            self.e_true = True
        else:
            self.e_true = False

    @property
    def energy_lo(self):
        return self.edges[:-1]

    @property
    def energy_hi(self):
        return self.edges[1:]

```
